---
title: Linked Lists note 
date: 2021-03-15
categories:
 - Note
tags:
 - Data Structure
 - Linked Lists
---

This article will discuss data structure of Linked Lists.

<!-- more -->
Arrays 

Trees

Tries

Stacks

Queues

**Linked Lists**

Graphs

Hash Tables 
# What is a Link List?
A link list is an ordered collection of data element. A data element can be represent as a node in a linked list. Each node consist of **data** and **a pointer**

Why Linked Lists?
Unlike array, data elements are not stored in a contiguous locations --> Loose structure comparing to Array. 
The data elements are linked using pointers. So, Linked Lists can easily insert or remove nodes

# Properties
- Successive node are connected by pointers 
- The last node point to null 
- A head pointer is maintained that points to first node of the list 
- Allocate memory as the data grows.    

:/
- Have to traverse from head to find the target element. Access to data with index is not possible. 
- Require memory space for pointer

:) 
- Insert or remove a data does not reorganize the entire data structure.

# Types of Linked Lists
- singly 
- doubly 
- circular 

# Big-O Notation - Time Complexity 

- prepend   O(1)
- append    O(1) 
- lookup    O(n) 
- insert    O(n)
- delete    O(n)

A singly linked list 

Linked List:
head                tail 
( 5 )--> ( 6 )--> ( 7 ) --> 

apples 
8975----> grapes
           4645 ---> peers 
                     5644 ---> null

# What is a pointer?
```js
let obj1 = {a:true}
let obj2 = obj1
obj1.a = 'booya'
//Now obj1 = 'booya' and obj2 = 'booya'
delete obj1
console.log('2',obj2)
//obj2 still show obj2 = 'booya' even though obj1 is deleted.
```

# Node 
``` js
class Node{
    constructor(data, next = null){
        this.data = data,
        this.next = next
    }
}
```
Operations of Node class
- An instance of node class is formed, the constructor method will call to initialize objects with properties.
- data and a pointer 

# Linked Lists
```js
class LinkedList{
    constructor(){
        this.head = null;
    }
}
```
Operation of Linked Lists
- An instance of linked list class is formed, the constructor method will call to initialize objects with properties.
- head with null

To create an instance of Linked List 
```js
let list = new LinkedList()
``` 

Operation of insert at first node 

```js
    add_first(value){
        newNode = new Node(4)
        newNode.next = this.head
        this.head = newNode
        this.length +=1
    }
```
<disqus/>